The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
This edition of the Science Fiction Radio Show will be an interview with author Joe Haldeman.
Joe Haldeman began publishing science fiction in the early 1970s and has already gained the highest
acclaimed field offers to its authors. His first novel of the forever war, which came out in 1975,
won both the Hugo and Nebula Awards for that year. Since then, he's published two novels,
Mindbridge and All My Sins Remembered, and a collection of short stories.
Haldeman is noted for the strong scientific backgrounds in his work,
but also for his sensitive treatment of human character.
Your writing started out as a hobby that developed into a profession, didn't it?
Well, yeah, although the development is fairly rampant, I always wrote ever since I was
oh, in second or third grade. I wrote a lot of poetry. And well, when I was
senior in college, my last semester, I took a creative writing course. I was in physics and
astronomy, but I wanted to take something easy to fill out my 18 hours or so. And I wrote two
science fiction stories. And eventually I sold both of them. I was drafted. And then when I came
back from Vietnam, they gave you 30 days leave. And I just re-typed the stories then and sent
them out. And one of them sold before I was out of the army. Then I don't know, I just,
I never thought you could make very much money at it. But I sort of saw the source of beer money.
And when I decided to drop out of graduate school and try a semester of writing full time,
I sold my first novel about a couple of days after I dropped out. So I never went back.
I tend to kind of cement things.
Yeah. Yeah. So it's funny, coincidence has lots to do with it. There's an awful lot of luck in
not getting started writing. Your first works, I had to do with war. You were in Vietnam and
that must have had a significant impact on you. Oh, yeah. Well, it's, of course, it's the most
dramatic thing that's ever happened to me. So it's the most obvious fuel for my fiction. Although I
don't want to be typed as a writer about war or a half written two novels and edited one anthology
about it. The old adage to write what you know and of the things I know that's one that's most
universally interesting. In Infinite Dreams, which is a collection of stories you published
in various publications since about 1972, war and violence linked with a change in mankind's
behavior seem to be recurrent themes in some of these stories. Are you saying that sometimes
man has to face violent conflicts in order to change his behavior? Well, I don't think I'm coming
out and saying it that directly. I think it's obvious that confronting death on a daily basis
changes people and sometimes radically for the worse. And that people who are totally dehumanized
by war. But speaking racially, I don't think you could make such a broad statement. What's behind
some of the things I'm writing is the hope that human nature eventually may improve to the point
where we won't have wars. Find other ways to settle our differences. Well, actually, being in the
army was an important effect on my writing aside from war, because I met a whole new class of people.
That is all of my friends while I was growing up. It tended to be a white middle class, upper middle
class kids, and they were successors, white middle class, upper class scientists, so forth.
And it was just a mundane revelation to find that people who came from different backgrounds
still had an awful lot in common with me. Most of the guys in my combat outfit were
urban black high school, which were your high school dropouts. Yeah, it got along quite well.
In both your novels, Mindbridge and Forever War, you have mankind united in the face of a crisis
with an alien race. Do you think that we'll ever be able to progress without this sort of conflict
spurring it on? I wonder whether, well, of course, it's a simplification, and it's an old
theme in science fiction. That is everybody getting together because the Martians are after us.
I wish I could say that I thought that we would be able to do this in the face of a less dramatic
uniform enemy, that is obviously the combined threats of overpopulation and dwindling resources
and industrial pollution are as threatening as either of the enemies in those two novels,
but we can't make a coherent face against this enemy and fight it.
It's just a way of making specific sort of a real but diffuse nightmare.
In some of your stories that do deal with war and conflict,
I think that's a story that's been heard on a personal level, where a man is
hit by a laser mine and his leg is cut off and he's hurt personally. Does that relate
to something in your own experiences? Well, I was wounded pretty severely,
I was hospitalized for six months, and it was a boogie trap. I didn't set it off,
somebody else did, but it was a pretty big one. I had over 200 separate wounds,
but managed to come out of it all right after a few months of physical therapy.
So it's, yeah, I draw on that experience. The one you're talking about is the mind of his own,
but I think I've got other short stories like the private war, private jaco, they draw on that memory.
Are you exercising some demons? I don't know whether I am or not. I think I'm just using
available material. I don't think the demon is too easily exercised by fiction.
That's a trueism that I don't think is always true.
In your first novel, Forever War, it's a novel that deals with war on anagolactic or
anagolactic level. Is it similar in some respects to Heinlein's Starship Troopers?
Did you intentionally write it as sort of an answer to that, or has it just come about,
did the work ended up that way? Well, there was no rough intention on my part. In fact, I didn't
realize until I was about 70 or 80 pages into the book that many of the details were similar to
Starship Troopers. Somebody else pointed that out when he read the manuscript. I wasn't doing an
answer to Heinlein's book. I thought Heinlein's book was admirable in many ways, even though we have
diametrically opposed philosophies. But no, it was, if there's any relation to any book,
it is to my own first novel, Warrior, because it's an expansion into a science fiction universe
of notions that I was trying to express in mainstream novel. Also, in Further War, you deal with
time compression on the Starships. They travel off to battle at speeds near to that of light,
and then when they return, hundreds of years have passed on the Earth. That's hard science.
Many writers, if they're considered hard science or soft science, and some mix the two styles
together, what part does hard science play in your writing? Well, I try to use it to make the
worlds that are in an event more believable, at least to me, since I do have a background in science
engineering. I think, well, the writer has to at least suspend his own disbelief while he's
making up these stories, and it's easier for me to do it if it's on a fairly solid scientific
foundation. Even though my science is rather old fashioned and probably rather sloppy, by
real scientists' standards, it's still enough to convince me, so it's fulfilled its function.
The, for instance, it goes deeper than just description, the time dilation in the Forever
War, so it's scientifically accurate. Its main function is metaphorical, and that is to demonstrate
how the soldiers who fight a war become isolated from the culture that they're supposed to be
protecting, using a science-fictional device to exaggerate something that happens to every soldier.
Yeah, and then that, when these soldiers leave and come back, the world they left isn't even the
same world once they get back to it. Which is quite true. I remember when I came back from
Vietnam, I was suddenly plunged into what was an alien culture, even though I'd only been
a soldier for two years. A lot of things had changed, and, you know, it's not a great thing
to come back. There were no victory parades, and that sort of thing.
Yeah, the conflicts aside, Forever War and Mind Bridge have optimistic endings,
but in your novel All My Sends Remembered, was that put together from a series of short stories?
About half of it appeared as two novelettes, you know.
Yeah, but in the end of it, the protagonist is just literally turned off and killed at the end of it.
It's rather pessimistic ending.
Well, it was planned all along that way. The story is about a bureaucracy that
totally takes over a man's identity, and he doesn't really exist except as a tool for that
bureaucracy. When it becomes an efficient tool, he's scrapped.
Yeah, he's programmed to go out and do certain, I guess what you'd call, covert operations.
Yeah, and he goes more or less against his will, that is to say, through very advanced techniques
of conditioning. He's turned into a thoroughly different person. He was a Buddhist, a pacifist
when he started out. He did not get the job he signed up for. They twisted him around into
killing machines. And at the end of it, he rebelled against that?
Yeah, finally. He was no longer suited their purpose and then they got rid of him.
Jumping up to Mindbridge, it's dedicated to your teachers at the Iowa Writers Workshop.
And the style of the novel is unusual. Is there a connection with that?
Oh, not really. The connection is with John Dos Passos, actually. I read the USH
Reliative some years before at Mindbridge and really was impressed by the way it worked and
thought it would work really well in science fiction. So I tried it out in a rather long,
short story to how it used a modest proposal. And it looked like it would work, so I went ahead
and applied it to Mindbridge. I did do most of that book while I was studying at Iowa,
and that's why I did a case. Yeah, you also used a lot of some humor to Howard Hughes'
Amon's proposal. Do you find that a useful tool to get across your message?
Yeah, sarcasm is the operative word. Yeah, I think even in a deadly serious book,
there has to be some leavening of humor. A lot of science fiction is just too somber and full of
message. I think my primary function is to be an entertainer. Humor is part of that.
I also noticed in the dedication, a lot of the authors at the workshop were mainstream authors.
What was their reaction to science fiction? Well, they were a little apprehensive about it.
See, they didn't know I was a science fiction writer when I joined the workshop.
So I joined on the basis of my first novel, which was not science fiction. And some of them were
outwardly hostile towards science fiction, such as Stanley Elkin. Others were anywhere between
apprehensive and slightly sympathetic. Stephen Becker, one of them, had actually had a few pieces
in the magazine Fantasy and Science Fiction. In general, though, they thinly disguised attitude
that this stuff was just commercial fiction and, therefore, beneath contempt. But they couldn't
ignore the fact that I was making more money than most of them were with my science fiction.
And that might have been a cause of tension in some cases.
Yeah, that's a point that's kind of hard to argue with. Yeah.
Yeah, that attitude is one I've never really been able to understand because some of our greatest
novels are science fiction novels. So that's true. But the field is judged by its worst,
not by its best. And people like that think of science fiction, they think in terms of great
D movies and Lazy Television. They've never read much of the best of the field. It's pity.
Back again to Mindbridge. A specific question about it. The alien race that created the Mindbridge,
you suggest they commit racial suicide. Why do you think a supposedly advanced race would do
something like that? I don't know. I was feeling well. They lived for millions or hundreds of
millions or even billions of years, thoroughly, individually immortal. And it just wasn't anything
else that they hadn't done except die. But I just that sort of throw away. There's I didn't put any
deep thought into why they should do that. I just wanted the image of the light from their passing,
fighting up the nights of Earth's fault. Humans were just the end of thought.
Yeah, they supernovaed their star. Yeah. The sickness loop
remains of their civilization. In tricentennial, when the starship returns to Earth,
all of the humans are gone. It never returns, actually. It doesn't return. Okay. It's a
shift in viewpoint. Oh, okay. What happened to the humans on the Earth? Some sort of a war.
Okay. The it doesn't say anything except that there's no life left on Earth. And
it looks pretty much like an ecological zero.
And my other question about tricentennial is who were the beings in the glass and metal tubes?
Well, those are the leftovers, the people who were on the L5 type colony. They're still there.
Their society is a closed cycle agriculture society. And there's no reason that they would
have to die when the Earth died. In various novels and stories that you've written, you've
created some excellent aliens. How do you go about constructing your aliens? Not very logically. I
haven't answered that before. And it's a hard thing to answer. I know, for instance, the LeVri in
Mindbridge. I did have this notion of aliens who were shape changers who appeared as
angelically beautiful creatures, but were ferocious killers, mindless killers. I wanted that image.
But normally, I don't know the the Sik-Kang and all my sense of
remembrance, I just thought I'd make a big bug that had a Jewish sense of humor.
So that's all I just, everything else is decoration.
You sort of close your eyes and see this critter and type it down.
I have on occasion looked through books of animal anatomy and just glanced through biology and
botany text books to try to be inspired by natural forms. But I don't have any algorithm that I
know works for making monsters. In Mindbridge and Forever War, humanity has greatly changed at the
end of both of the books, almost an evolutionary difference. Do you believe that we will radically
have radically different natures in the future? I think it's quite possible, even say within the
span of a century, so many of the things that determine human nature are things that can be
mitigated by technology, such as the problem of dying so soon. That is, it's possible that we'll,
in a couple of generations, be able to live a century, two centuries, maybe a thousand years,
maybe as long as we care to. That'll radically change human nature because it will take the pressure
off of individuals. There are other less so sanguine notions. It's possible that the sciences of
communication will grow into a kind of sophisticated mind control, where it will be difficult for the
individual to know exactly what is his idea and what has been induced by his own society.
A sort of a sophisticated life-long brainwashing doesn't seem too unlikely, if you can argue that
it's happening now. Similar to what Corn Lutheran Poel did in Space Merchants. Right. Space Merchants is
chillingly prophetic novel, actually. They do love things with their heads. Those of us who
stay away from the TV screen aren't as affected by others, but it is there. The novels and short
stories that you've written, which one did you enjoy writing the most? I don't know, let me see.
Strangely enough, I think I enjoyed most writing a pseudonymous adventure novel called Antares
within, because it was so easy. Most of my writing was very difficult to do. And this is just setting
a spy up and letting him knock the bad guys down and win in the end. It's all very pleasant.
In terms of more serious work, I think Mindbridge was the most fun to write. I had the most latitude
there. I also enjoyed that the most until this latest one. Yeah, I read Atar the Merman. Oh,
God, I guess it was a couple of years back. When did you write that? Oh, I guess about 71.
But that appeared to be the beginning of a series. Yes, that's right. The ideal was that
I was going to write three or four, and then somebody else was going to pick it up. That's why
it's not under my name. It's what they call a house name. And I got tired of the damn thing
after two. I did write a third one and got paid for it, but it's pretty lousy and they
didn't print it. And then the whole series just fizzled away. I guess they were working on a
contemporary enthusiasm over dolphins. And when that started evaporating, they
put the kibosh on the series. Or maybe they couldn't find anybody to continue it.
Yeah, I would imagine writing a series book like that would be difficult.
Well, the first one's easy. And in the case of Atar, the second one was pretty easy, too.
But I've also done two Star Trek novels, which are sort of series things. It gets old real fast.
You can't make up things. You have to be consistent with the canon that you've already established.
And that can get real boring after about 100,000 orders. Terrific.
Yeah, and the Star Trek material that you've written, the framework is already built and
you have to build a story around the framework. Yeah, it's already established. That was sort
of cute, though, writing the first one. I had fun because I'd been in the service during most of
Star Trek. And so I had to treat it as a research project. And I would solve the TV show every
afternoon. And then I read all the books and make charts and things like that and sat down and wrote
the books. That was an odd thing. I had to sign a two-bub contract. Whereas I found the first one
very interesting and fun to write. The second one was quite difficult to write. And the first one
took three months and the second took nine. How did you get approached to write those?
Well, it was just being in the right place the right time. In a way, Jim Blish was doing the
series of these things. And I knew they were quite financially successful.
And when Jim died, I was in correspondence with Fred Pole, who was his editor there.
And I just apologized for being like a vulture circling over the corpse. But I asked whether
anybody was picking up Jim's work and he said, why don't you give it a try? And actually, well,
Jim was taking the scripts from the TV show and just turning them into short stories. Whereas he
wanted me to do what Jim would have done if he had lived, which was write original novels around
the Star Trek characters. One of them, the novels was a Planet of Judgment. Let's see. I read one
of them. And that was one I had to do where they discovered, I guess, what would be sort of considered
a Dyson Sphere. Yeah. Is that Planet of Judgment or is that the other one?
World without end. I like doing the technical part of that. It's not a Dyson Sphere. Well,
it is a hollowed out asteroid. Burnel Sphere is more proper name for it. But I tried to work out this
alien science. I've got a notebook full of stuff about how flying aliens would build their cities.
That part was fun enough. I had to amuse myself sometimes.
As to your writing itself, how do you go about constructing your novels? Do you come up with
an idea for the novel or characters and then work them into a particular setting or what?
Well, the most consistent pattern I have is working out the actual structure,
the way time is handled in the novel. It sounds rather dry, but I don't like to outline the story
in any detail because then there are no surprises. So I start out with the structure of the viewpoint
is handled and so forth. Start working and modify the structure as the story builds. Usually I
have some vague idea of how it's going to end. That becomes less vague as the novel progresses.
The short stories I normally start with the character who seems interesting. Make them do something.
In other words, you set up sort of a lettuce work and then you let the story build itself on that.
Yeah, that seems to work better for me. Although often the structure does have to be modified halfway
through. I don't, you know, want to be hit into a procrastin bed by it.
What is worlds about? It's a first part of a trilogy.
Yeah, well it starts out about a century from now.
And it's essentially the story of a woman who grew up, was born and grew up on a space colony,
a space settlement. It is sent to Earth for a year of postgraduate work or finishing, if you want to call it that.
Being set up for a political position as it lives on between this world and Earth.
And various strange things happened to her in the year that she's here. It's sort of a
old Geltung Suramath kind of a novel. She grows by being sort of bounced around by Earth.
That's, uh, and the second novel, uh, Stars, takes over for the first one ends and takes her into all age.
Will all three novels be following this one character?
No, she dies in the second one. I think. I haven't finished the second one.
That's an interesting way of writing. You, you discover it as you write it.
Yeah, yeah, that's for me.
Watch for Joe Haldeman's new novel, Worlds, the first part of a trilogy coming in March from Viking Press.
This is David Cruz and David Carson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association in conjunction with KOCV FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.